We'll now get some practice using the low-level rpm command
in order to look at a package, try to remove it, etc.
So, we're going to type "rpm -qa" for query, and look at all packages on the system.
And then we're going to grep to look for the package bzip2, okay?
And you see there's actually two rpm packages which have bzip2 in their names.
The actual bzip2 program and
then bzip2-libs, which is libraries that depend on bzip2.
So, let's take a look more at information about bzip2,
if I do rpm, if I do do "rpm -q" for query, "i" for information.
And then "l" for list of files, and that's a lot, so I'll pipe it through "less".
Oops, I forgot to give the name of the packag, so bzip2 [rpm -qil bzip2 | less].
You see the name is bzib2, you see it's version 1.0.6.
We see it's source rpm [src.rpm] here, we see when it was
released, in November 2015 at centos.org,
and then a description of what it does.
It's a freely available, patent-free, high quality, data compressor, etc.
And then a list of the files that are part of bzip2.
If I want to get a little bit more detailed look at what's in there,
I could do something a little fancier, like "rpm -ql bzip2".
We just list the files.
And then, I'll make that a shell command and substitute forward, and
do an "ls -lF" on that [ls -lF $(rpm -ql bzip2)].
So this would give me a detailed listing.
And then, I'll pipe it into less, and these are the actual files that are in
the package in a little bit more detail, like their length and what type of files.
You’ll notice where it says bunzip2 and bzip2 are really the same file.
It’s just a symbolic link and the system knows what to do or
I should say the application knows what to do, whether to zip or
unzip, depending on how it’s called.
Now, let's see what happens if I try to remove the package.
So, I should be a root to do this, so
I'll do an "sudo", and then I'll do an "rpm -e" for erase.
And then, just to be extra careful, I'll use the "--test", which means it won't
actually do anything with this option, it'll just see if it could do it, "bzip2" [sudo rpm -e --test bzip2].
So I try to remove it, and it's telling me that
I can't do that because it's needed by those following three packages,
as well as the file-roller program, which is
an archiving program present on basically all Linux distributions.
And then, I can get a little more information in a different way with "rpm -q
--whatprovides bzip2",
and you'll see it's the bzip2 package.
And if I do "whatrequires" [rpm -q --whatrequires bzip2],
I get the same information about the three packages that would need
to have bzip2 installed for them to behave properly and not crash or anything.
A little bit later, we’re going to discuss yum and zypper and also dnf,
which are higher level programs that can handle dependencies in a robust fashion.
rpm is really designed for individual packages which
are listed on the command line or groups of packages listed on the command line.